    FRANCISCO at his post. Enter to him BERNARDO 
    'Tis now struck twelve; get thee to bed, Francisco.
    For this relief much thanks: 'tis bitter cold,
    Friends to this ground.
    What, is Horatio there?
    What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
    Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
    Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:
    With us to watch the minutes of this night;
    That if again this apparition come,
    And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
    Had made his course to illume that part of heaven
    What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
    It is offended.
    'Tis gone, and will not answer.
    Is not this something more than fantasy?
    Before my God, I might not this believe
    'Tis strange.
    Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
    This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
    Why this same strict and most observant watch
    What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
    Who is't that can inform me?
    At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
    For so this side of our known world esteem'd him--
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal'd compact,
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
    Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant,
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
    Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
    For food and diet, to some enterprise
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other--
    So by his father lost: and this, I take it,
    The source of this our watch and the chief head
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
    Well may it sort that this portentous figure
    That was and is the question of these wars.
    A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
    Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
    'Tis here!
    'Tis here!
    'Tis gone!
    For it is, as the air, invulnerable,
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
    Awake the god of day; and, at his warning,
    To his confine: and of the truth herein
    This present object made probation.
    Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
    This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
    Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
    Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
    That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
    Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
    The imperial jointress to this warlike state,
    Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
    With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
    Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
    Colleagued with the dream of his advantage,
    Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
    Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:
    Thus much the business is: we have here writ
    Of this his nephew's purpose,--to suppress
    His further gait herein; in that the levies,
    The lists and full proportions, are all made
    Out of his subject: and we here dispatch
    For bearers of this greeting to old Norway;
    You told us of some suit; what is't, Laertes?
    The head is not more native to the heart,
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
    My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
    Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent:
    How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
    Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
    Ay, madam, it is common.
    Seems, madam! nay it is; I know not 'seems.'
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    Nor the dejected 'havior of the visage,
    'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
    In obstinate condolement is a course
    Of impious stubbornness; 'tis unmanly grief;
    For what we know must be and is as common
    Why should we in our peevish opposition
    Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
    'This must be so.' We pray you, throw to earth
    This unprevailing woe, and think of us
    Than that which dearest father bears his son,
    It is most retrograde to our desire:
    Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply:
    This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
    O, that this too too solid flesh would melt
    His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
    Seem to me all the uses of this world!
    Fie on't! ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden,
    Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
    So excellent a king; that was, to this,
    Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
    Let me not think on't--Frailty, thy name is woman!--
    O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,
    It is not nor it cannot come to good:
    A truant disposition, good my lord.
    But what is your affair in Elsinore?
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
    I shall not look upon his like again.
    This marvel to you.
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they, distilled
    Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
    But where was this?
    And vanish'd from our sight.
    'Tis very strange.
    As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;
    Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
    Then saw you not his face?
    O, yes, my lord; he wore his beaver up.
    And fix'd his eyes upon you?
    His beard was grizzled--no?
    It was, as I have seen it in his life,
    If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
    I'll visit you.
    My father's spirit in arms! all is not well;
    Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
    For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,
    In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
    The virtue of his will: but you must fear,
    His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
    For he himself is subject to his birth:
    Carve for himself; for on his choice depends
    The safety and health of this whole state;
    And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
    Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
    It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
    As he in his particular act and place
    May give his saying deed; which is no further
    If with too credent ear you list his songs,
    To his unmaster'd importunity.
    Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
    The chariest maid is prodigal enough,
    Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
    I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,
    And recks not his own rede.
    A double blessing is a double grace,
    Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
    This above all: to thine ownself be true,
    Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!
    'Tis in my memory lock'd,
    What is't, Ophelia, be hath said to you?
    'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late
    If it be so, as so 'tis put on me,
    What is between you? give me up the truth.
    Of his affection to me.
    Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
    And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    You must not take for fire. From this time
    Believe so much in him, that he is young
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
    The better to beguile. This is for all:
    I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,
    Have you so slander any moment leisure,
    The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
    It is a nipping and an eager air.
    No, it is struck.
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
    A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within
    What does this mean, my lord?
    The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
    And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
    The triumph of his pledge.
    Ay, marry, is't:
    And to the manner born, it is a custom
    This heavy-headed revel east and west
    They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase
    Since nature cannot choose his origin--
    To his own scandal.
    Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
    Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,
    To cast thee up again. What may this mean,
    Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,
    So horridly to shake our disposition
    Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    And makes each petty artery in this body
    Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him.
    Have after. To what issue will this come?
    Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
    My hour is almost come,
    To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
    But this eternal blazon must not be
    To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
    Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
    Murder most foul, as in the best it is;
    But this most foul, strange and unnatural.
    Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear:
    'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
    Now wears his crown.
    With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,--
    So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
    The leperous distilment; whose effect
    Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd:
    Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd,
    But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
    And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire:
    In this distracted globe. Remember thee!
    My tables,--meet it is I set it down,
    It is 'Adieu, adieu! remember me.'
    How is't, my noble lord?
    To tell us this.
    Such as it is; and for mine own poor part,
    Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
    And much offence too. Touching this vision here,
    It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:
    For your desire to know what is between us,
    What is't, my lord? we will.
    Come on--you hear this fellow in the cellarage--
    Never to speak of this that you have seen,
    Never to speak of this that you have heard,
    O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
    To put an antic disposition on,
    With arms encumber'd thus, or this headshake,
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
    That you know aught of me: this not to do,
    And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
    May do, to express his love and friending to you,
    The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,
    Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
    You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,
    Before you visit him, to make inquire
    Of his behavior.
    Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
    By this encompassment and drift of question
    Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
    As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
    And in part him: ' do you mark this, Reynaldo?
    As may dishonour him; take heed of that;
    My lord, that would dishonour him.
    That he is open to incontinency;
    That's not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly
    Wherefore should you do this?
    And I believe, it is a fetch of wit:
    He closes with you in this consequence;
    And then, sir, does he this--he does--what was I
    There falling out at tennis:' or perchance,
    Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth:
    And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
    Observe his inclination in yourself.
    And let him ply his music.
    Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced;
    No hat upon his head; his stockings foul'd,
    Ungarter'd, and down-gyved to his ancle;
    Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other;
    He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm;
    And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
    He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
    As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
    And end his being: that done, he lets me go:
    And, with his head over his shoulder turn'd,
    He seem'd to find his way without his eyes;
    This is the very ecstasy of love,
    I did repel his fetters and denied
    His access to me.
    By heaven, it is as proper to our age
    As it is common for the younger sort
    To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king:
    This must be known; which, being kept close, might
    More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
    And sith so neighbour'd to his youth and havior,
    Your visitation shall receive such thanks
    And I beseech you instantly to visit
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
    Heavens make our presence and our practises
    And I do think, or else this brain of mine
    The head and source of all your son's distemper.
    I doubt it is no other but the main;
    His father's death, and our o'erhasty marriage.
    His nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
    That so his sickness, age and impotence
    Makes vow before his uncle never more
    And his commission to employ those soldiers,
    Through your dominions for this enterprise,
    Answer, and think upon this business.
    This business is well ended.
    What majesty should be, what duty is,
    Why day is day, night night, and time is time,
    Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
    And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
    I will be brief: your noble son is mad:
    What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
    That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
    And pity 'tis 'tis true: a foolish figure;
    That we find out the cause of this effect,
    Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
    For this effect defective comes by cause:
    I have a daughter--have while she is mine--
    Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise.
    That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is
    Came this from Hamlet to her?
    this machine is to him, HAMLET.'
    This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
    And more above, hath his solicitings,
    Received his love?
    When I had seen this hot love on the wing--
    Or look'd upon this love with idle sight;
    And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
    'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star;
    This must not be:' and then I precepts gave her,
    That she should lock herself from his resort,
    Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
    Do you think 'tis this?
    That I have positively said 'Tis so,'
    When it proved otherwise?
    [Pointing to his head and shoulder]
    Take this from this, if this be otherwise:
    Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
    And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
    Let me be no assistant for a state,
    Excellent well; you are a fishmonger.
    Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be
    god kissing carrion,--Have you a daughter?
    Let her not walk i' the sun: conception is a
    was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and
    love; very near this. I'll speak to him again.
    What is the matter, my lord?
    [Aside] Though this be madness, yet there is method
    Indeed, that is out o' the air.
    How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness
    You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.
    Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of
    is a strumpet. What's the news?
    Then is doomsday near: but your news is not true.
    that she sends you to prison hither?
    Prison, my lord!
    Denmark's a prison.
    Then is the world one.
    Why, then, 'tis none to you; for there is nothing
    it is a prison.
    Why then, your ambition makes it one; 'tis too
    substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
    A dream itself is but a shadow.
    quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
    To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
    your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
    for; and there is a kind of confession in your looks
    prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king
    custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily
    with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
    earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most
    excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave
    o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted
    What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason!
    what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not
    He that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty
    shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not
    sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part
    there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases,
    players--as it is most like, if their means are no
    Ay, that they do, my lord; Hercules and his load too.
    It is not very strange; for mine uncle is king of
    hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little.
    'Sblood, there is something in this more than
    Flourish of trumpets within
    come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion
    and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb,
    I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is
    hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet
    out of his swaddling-clouts.
    say an old man is twice a child.
    Then came each actor on his ass,--
    comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
    historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-
    comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
    friend! thy face is valenced since I saw thee last:
    lady and mistress! By'r lady, your ladyship is
    at this line: let me see, let me see--
    it is not so:--it begins with Pyrrhus:--
    Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
    Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd
    With heraldry more dismal; head to foot
    Now is he total gules; horridly trick'd
    With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
    good discretion.
    Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword,
    Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
    But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
    Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
    Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
    Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear: for, lo! his sword,
    And like a neutral to his will and matter,
    This is too long.
    That's good; 'mobled queen' is good.
    With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
    Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd,
    In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
    Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has
    'Tis well: I'll have thee speak out the rest soon.
    after his desert, and who should 'scape whipping?
    they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.
    Is it not monstrous that this player here,
    Could force his soul so to his own conceit
    That from her working all his visage wann'd,
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
    A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
    With forms to his conceit? and all for nothing!
    As deep as to the lungs? who does me this?
    To make oppression bitter, or ere this
    With this slave's offal: bloody, bawdy villain!
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
    Before mine uncle: I'll observe his looks;
    As he is very potent with such spirits,
    More relative than this: the play 's the thing
    Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
    Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
    He does confess he feels himself distracted;
    Of his true state.
    But with much forcing of his disposition.
    Most free in his reply.
    This night to play before him.
    'Tis most true:
    And drive his purpose on to these delights.
    And gather by him, as he is behaved,
    If 't be the affliction of his love or no
    And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,
    Madam, I wish it may.
    Read on this book;
    That show of such an exercise may colour
    Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this,--
    'Tis too much proved--that with devotion's visage
    [Aside] O, 'tis too true!
    Than is my deed to my most painted word:
    To be, or not to be, that is the question,
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation
    Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep;
    When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
    The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
    When he himself might his quietus make
    The undiscover'd country from whose bourn
    And enterprises of great pith and moment
    With this regard their currents turn awry,
    The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons
    How does your honour for this many a day?
    admit no discourse to your beauty.
    transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the
    force of honesty can translate beauty into his
    likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the
    so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of
    If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for
    marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough
    another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and
    O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
    That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
    Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me,
    Love! his affections do not that way tend;
    Was not like madness. There's something in his soul,
    O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
    And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
    This something-settled matter in his heart,
    Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
    The origin and commencement of his grief
    Let his queen mother all alone entreat him
    To show his grief: let her be round with him;
    Your wisdom best shall think.
    inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such
    Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion
    word to the action; with this special o'erstep not
    the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is
    first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the
    the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone,
    praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely,
    that, neither having the accent of Christians nor
    the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
    your clowns speak no more than is set down for them;
    How now, my lord! I will the king hear this piece of work?
    Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
    And could of men distinguish, her election
    That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
    As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
    There is a play to-night before the king;
    Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt
    It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
    For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
    In censure of his seeming.
    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
    Danish march. A flourish. Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, POLONIUS, OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and others
    Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish: I eat
    the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.
    I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words
    What is, my lord?
    Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
    hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
    the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is 'For, O, for, O,
    the hobby-horse is forgot.'
    Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing him, and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her neck: lays him down upon a bank of flowers: she, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his crown, kisses it, and pours poison in the King's ears, and exit. The Queen returns; finds the King dead, and makes passionate action. The Poisoner, with some two or three Mutes, comes in again, seeming to lament with her. The dead body is carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with gifts: she seems loath and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts his love
    What means this, my lord?
    Marry, this is miching mallecho; it means mischief.
    Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
    We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot
    Will he tell us what this show meant?
    Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
    'Tis brief, my lord.
    But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,
    That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
    Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:
    Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know;
    And as my love is sized, my fear is so:
    Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
    And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
    When second husband kisses me in bed.
    Purpose is but the slave to memory,
    Most necessary 'tis that we forget
    To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:
    This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
    For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
    The great man down, you mark his favourite flies;
    Directly seasons him his enemy.
    But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
    An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope!
    'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile;
    And never come mischance between us twain!
    Madam, how like you this play?
    No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence
    The Mouse-trap. Marry, how? Tropically. This play
    is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is
    the duke's name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see
    anon; 'tis a knavish piece of work: but what o'
    This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
    Pours the poison into the sleeper's ears
    He poisons him i' the garden for's estate. His
    name's Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in
    The king rises.
    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers-- if
    This realm dismantled was
    Upon the talk of the poisoning?
    Sir, a whole history.
    Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.
    Your wisdom should show itself more richer to
    signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him
    to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far
    Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and
    Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right
    Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseased: but,
    O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But
    is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's
    Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you
    is something musty.
    O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too
    this pipe?
    'Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with
    mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.
    the top of my compass: and there is much music,
    excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot
    By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.
    Methinks it is like a weasel.
    It is backed like a weasel.
    By and by is easily said.
    Tis now the very witching time of night,
    Contagion to this world: now could I drink hot blood,
    The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:
    My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites;
    To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
    I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
    Out of his lunacies.
    Most holy and religious fear it is
    The single and peculiar life is bound,
    What's near it with it: it is a massy wheel,
    Are mortised and adjoin'd; which, when it falls,
    Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone
    Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage;
    For we will fetters put upon this fear,
    My lord, he's going to his mother's closet:
    And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
    'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
    O, my offence is rank it smells to heaven;
    And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
    But to confront the visage of offence?
    And what's in prayer but this two-fold force,
    My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
    In the corrupted currents of this world
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
    Buys out the law: but 'tis not so above;
    There is no shuffling, there the action lies
    In his true nature; and we ourselves compell'd,
    Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;
    I, his sole son, do this same villain send
    O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
    With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
    And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?
    'Tis heavy with him: and am I then revenged,
    To take him in the purging of his soul,
    When he is fit and season'd for his passage?
    When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
    Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed;
    That has no relish of salvation in't;
    Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
    And that his soul may be as damn'd and black
    This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
    [Rising] My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:
    Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
    O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
    As kill a king, and marry with his brother.
    Lifts up the array and discovers POLONIUS
    Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
    That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
    In noise so rude against me?
    And sets a blister there, makes marriage-vows
    Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
    With tristful visage, as against the doom,
    Look here, upon this picture, and on this,
    See, what a grace was seated on this brow;
    New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;
    Where every god did seem to set his seal,
    This was your husband. Look you now, what follows:
    Here is your husband; like a mildew'd ear,
    Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
    Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
    And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?
    The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
    Would step from this to this? Sense, sure, you have,
    O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
    A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
    And put it in his pocket!
    Do not forget: this visitation
    How is it with you, lady?
    Alas, how is't with you,
    And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?
    Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
    His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
    Lest with this piteous action you convert
    To whom do you speak this?
    Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
    My father, in his habit as he lived!
    This the very coinage of your brain:
    This bodiless creation ecstasy
    And makes as healthful music: it is not madness
    Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
    To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
    Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
    He likewise gives a frock or livery,
    That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
    I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord,
    To punish me with this and this with me,
    That I must be their scourge and minister.
    Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
    Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
    Make you to ravel all this matter out,
    For who, that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
    I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on.
    For 'tis the sport to have the engineer
    Hoist with his own petard: and 't shall go hard
    And blow them at the moon: O, 'tis most sweet,
    This man shall set me packing:
    Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor
    Who was in life a foolish prating knave.
    You must translate: 'tis fit we understand them.
    Where is your son?
    Bestow this place on us a little while.
    Which is the mightier: in his lawless fit,
    Whips out his rapier, cries, 'A rat, a rat!'
    And, in this brainish apprehension, kills
    His liberty is full of threats to all;
    Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
    This mad young man: but so much was our love,
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
    Even on the pith of Life. Where is he gone?
    O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
    Shows itself pure; he weeps for what is done.
    But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him:
    Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
    Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends;
    My soul is full of discord and dismay.
    What noise? who calls on Hamlet?
    Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
    Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
    Ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance, his
    rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
    an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to
    gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
    I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a
    foolish ear.
    My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go
    The body is with the king, but the king is not with
    the body. The king is a thing--
    How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
    He's loved of the distracted multitude,
    And where tis so, the offender's scourge is weigh'd,
    This sudden sending him away must seem
    Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown
    Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
    But where is he?
    Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain
    worm is your only emperor for diet: we fat all
    maggots: your fat king and your lean beggar is but
    variable service, two dishes, but to one table:
    A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a
    king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
    What dost you mean by this?
    Where is Polonius?
    this month, you shall nose him as you go up the
    Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,--
    The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
    The associates tend, and every thing is bent
    So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
    My mother: father and mother is man and wife; man
    and wife is one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!
    Away! for every thing is seal'd and done
    After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
    And thou must cure me: till I know 'tis done,
    Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king;
    Tell him that, by his licence, Fortinbras
    Craves the conveyance of a promised march
    Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
    If that his majesty would aught with us,
    We shall express our duty in his eye;
    Yes, it is already garrison'd.
    Will not debate the question of this straw:
    This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace,
    And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
    If his chief good and market of his time
    Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,
    Of thinking too precisely on the event,
    A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
    Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do;'
    Witness this army of such mass and charge
    Makes mouths at the invisible event,
    Exposing what is mortal and unsure
    Which is not tomb enough and continent
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
    She is importunate, indeed distract:
    That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,
    To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is,
    Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss:
    So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
    Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?
    By his cockle hat and staff,
    And his sandal shoon.
    Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
    He is dead and gone, lady,
    He is dead and gone;
    At his head a grass-green turf,
    At his heels a stone.
    White his shroud as the mountain snow,--
    Pray you, let's have no words of this; but when they
    ask you what it means, say you this:
    To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
    Then up he rose, and donn'd his clothes,
    By Gis and by Saint Charity,
    You promised me to wed.
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
    Of his own just remove: the people muddied,
    Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers,
    Her brother is in secret come from France;
    Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
    And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death;
    In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
    A noise within
    Alack, what noise is this?
    What is the matter?
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
    Noise within
    Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without.
    What is the cause, Laertes,
    Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
    Where is my father?
    Let him demand his fill.
    I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
    Of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge,
    None but his enemies.
    To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms;
    How now! what noise is that?
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    O heavens! is't possible, a young maid's wits
    Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
    And in his grave rain'd many a tear:--
    O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false
    steward, that stole his master's daughter.
    This nothing's more than matter.
    love, remember: and there is pansies. that's for thoughts.
    a difference. There's a daisy: I would give you
    For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
    No, no, he is dead:
    His beard was as white as snow,
    All flaxen was his poll:
    He is gone, he is gone,
    God ha' mercy on his soul!
    And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi' ye.
    Do you see this, O God?
    Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will.
    To you in satisfaction; but if not,
    Let this be so;
    His means of death, his obscure funeral--
    No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
    And where the offence is let the great axe fall.
    let to know it is.
    this, give these fellows some means to the king:
    I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with
    As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
    But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother
    Lives almost by his looks; and for myself--
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
    Convert his gyves to graces; so that my arrows,
    A sister driven into desperate terms,
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
    This to your majesty; this to the queen.
    What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
    Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
    'Tis Hamlets character. 'Naked!
    Can you advise me?
    That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
    As how should it be so? how otherwise?--
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means
    And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
    But even his mother shall uncharge the practise
    The rather, if you could devise it so
    What part is that, my lord?
    Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
    And they can well on horseback: but this gallant
    Had witchcraft in't; he grew unto his seat;
    And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,
    I know him well: he is the brooch indeed
    For art and exercise in your defence
    If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
    Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
    That he could nothing do but wish and beg
    Now, out of this,--
    What out of this, my lord?
    Why ask you this?
    But that I know love is begun by time;
    And nothing is at a like goodness still;
    For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
    Dies in his own too much: that we would do
    We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes
    And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
    To cut his throat i' the church.
    Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.
    We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
    And set a double varnish on the fame
    And wager on your heads: he, being remiss,
    A sword unbated, and in a pass of practise
    That is but scratch'd withal: I'll touch my point
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
    Let's further think of this;
    May fit us to our shape: if this should fail,
    'Twere better not assay'd: therefore this project
    If this should blast in proof. Soft! let me see:
    So fast they follow; your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
    There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream;
    Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples
    As one incapable of her own distress,
    Alas, then, she is drown'd?
    It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
    But that this folly douts it.
    How much I had to do to calm his rage!
    Now fear I this will give it start again;
    Is she to be buried in Christian burial that
    I tell thee she is: and therefore make her grave
    Christian burial.
    Why, 'tis found so.
    is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned
    stands the man; good; if the man go to this water,
    and drown himself, it is, will he, nill he, he
    that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
    But is this law?
    Ay, marry, is't; crowner's quest law.
    Will you ha' the truth on't? If this had not been
    Christian burial.
    great folk should have countenance in this world to
    Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient
    What is he that builds stronger than either the
    gallows is built stronger than the church: argal,
    Enter HAMLET and HORATIO, at a distance
    ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when
    you are asked this question next, say 'a
    Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he
    'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath
    But age, with his stealing steps,
    Hath claw'd me in his clutch,
    might be the pate of a politician, which this ass
    sweet lord! How dost thou, good lord?' This might
    be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord
    For such a guest is meet.
    lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillets,
    his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he
    suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the
    his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be
    in's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
    his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
    his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and
    the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him
    no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than
    very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in
    this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?
    in that. I will speak to this fellow. Whose
    grave's this, sirrah?
    For such a guest is meet.
    You lie out on't, sir, and therefore it is not
    yours: for my part, I do not lie in't, and yet it is mine.
    'Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine:
    'tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
    'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away gain, from me to
    Who is to be buried in't?
    How absolute the knave is! we must speak by the
    it; the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
    gaffs his kibe. How long hast thou been a
    How long is that since?
    is mad, and sent into England.
    Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits
    Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
    Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that
    is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.
    Here's a skull now; this skull has lain in the earth
    flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same skull,
    This?
    borne me on his back a thousand times; and now, how
    abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rims at
    it. Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know
    her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must
    Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this fashion i'
    Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of
    The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?
    And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
    That is Laertes,
    As we have warrantise: her death was doubtful;
    Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
    May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
    A ministering angel shall my sister be,
    Till of this flat a mountain you have made,
    To o'ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head
    [Advancing] What is he whose grief
    Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
    Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
    Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.
    Why I will fight with him upon this theme
    O, he is mad, Laertes.
    Woo't drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?
    Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
    This is mere madness:
    When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
    His silence will sit drooping.
    What is the reason that you use me thus?
    I loved you ever: but it is no matter;
    The cat will mew and dog will have his day.
    This grave shall have a living monument:
    So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other;
    And praised be rashness for it, let us know,
    Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,
    That is most certain.
    Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,--
    That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
    Here's the commission: read it at more leisure.
    Devised a new commission, wrote it fair:
    I once did hold it, as our statists do,
    As England was his faithful tributary,
    As love between them like the palm might flourish,
    How was this seal'd?
    Which was the model of that Danish seal;
    Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
    Why, man, they did make love to this employment;
    'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
    Why, what a king is this!
    Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
    And with such cozenage--is't not perfect conscience,
    To quit him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd,
    To let this canker of our nature come
    What is the issue of the business there.
    It will be short: the interim is mine;
    The portraiture of his: I'll court his favours.
    But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
    Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
    I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this water-fly?
    Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to
    beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at
    the king's mess: 'tis a chough; but, as I say,
    Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I
    should impart a thing to you from his majesty.
    spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use; 'tis for the head.
    I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
    No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
    It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
    But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my
    Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry,--as
    'twere,--I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his
    great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter,--
    HAMLET moves him to put on his hat
    Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes; believe
    indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
    Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you;
    neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
    great article; and his infusion of such dearth and
    rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his
    semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace
    him, his umbrage, nothing more.
    What imports the nomination of this gentleman?
    His purse is empty already; all's golden words are spent.
    You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is--
    I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation
    laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
    What's his weapon?
    That's two of his weapons: but, well.
    against the Danish. Why is this 'imponed,' as you call it?
    Sir, I will walk here in the hall: if it please his
    majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
    king hold his purpose, I will win for him an I can;
    To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.
    This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
    He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it.
    My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young
    pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now
    You will lose this wager, my lord.
    have been in continual practise: I shall win at the
    about my heart: but it is no matter.
    It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of
    If your mind dislike any thing, obey it: I will
    'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
    readiness is all: since no man has aught of what he
    leaves, what is't to leave betimes?
    Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
    This presence knows,
    And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd
    With sore distraction. What I have done,
    Who does it, then? His madness: if't be so,
    Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
    His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
    Sir, in this audience,
    Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
    I am satisfied in nature,
    Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.
    No, by this hand.
    But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
    This is too heavy, let me see another.
    This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
    Stay; give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
    I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile. Come.
    [Aside] It is the poison'd cup: it is too late.
    [Aside] And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience.
    They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
    How is't, Laertes?
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.
    It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain;
    In thee there is not half an hour of life;
    The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
    Unbated and envenom'd: the foul practise
    Never to rise again: thy mother's poison'd:
    Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
    He is justly served;
    It is a poison temper'd by himself.
    You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
    That are but mutes or audience to this act,
    Had I but time--as this fell sergeant, death,
    Is strict in his arrest--O, I could tell you--
    To the unsatisfied.
    And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
    What warlike noise is this?
    This warlike volley.
    The potent poison quite o'er-crows my spirit:
    Which have solicited. The rest is silence.
    Enter FORTINBRAS, the English Ambassadors, and others
    Where is this sight?
    What is it ye would see?
    This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
    What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,
    The sight is dismal;
    To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd,
    Not from his mouth,
    But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    Fall'n on the inventors' reads: all this can I
    I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
    And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more;
    But let this same be presently perform'd,
    Even while men's minds are wild; lest more mischance
    To have proved most royally: and, for his passage,
    Take up the bodies: such a sight as this
    Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.
    A dead march. Exeunt, bearing off the dead bodies; after which a peal of ordnance is shot off
